---
title: "Why Data Science Project Fail?"
tags: [Data Science]
date: 2024-10-18
---
I recently read [Why Data Science Projects Fail: The Harsh Realities of Implementing AI and Analytics, without the Hype](https://www.amazon.com/Why-Data-Science-Projects-Fail/dp/103266133X). It is a great  book that talks about what why many data science projects fail. It is a very informative read and I suggest you check it out. In this post I will give a very quick summary of what I learned for my future self.
<!--more-->

 The authors highlight that It many  data science projects fail evil at big companies. They have identified 4 themes (strategy, process, people and technology) that affect the success of data science projects.

# Strategy

The main strategic failings are:

- **The need**: there is a lack of need in the organization for data science projects this can be due to:
	1. A poorly defined use case that has no clear business value or solving a problem  that is not currently a business priority.
	2. No actionable insights generated by the project that can derive business decisions.
	3. A solution looking for a problem; this could happen if a new hyped technology wants to be adopted without finding a proper use case.
- **Measure of success**: projects fail because there is no clear definition of done and a measure of success e.g., what are the expected deliverables
- **Buy-in from management**: projects fail because there is no buy-in from leadership and management this could be due to lack of awareness, feature of becoming obsolete or internal politics.
- **data-driven Decision-making culture**:  data projects need a data-driven or data-informed organizations that are analytically oriented. Projects fail in organization where decision making is driven by the highest paid person.

# Process

The main process failings are:

- **Data**: Not having enough data or having too many data issues (e.g., missing, inconsistencies) will make it difficult to build successful projects that deliver value.
- **Reasonable Expectations**: data science and AI have received a lot of hype which usually sets up a lot of unreasonable expectations for a new project. It is important to set realistic expectations from the start given the data state and the expected time frame
- **Clean and Continuous Communication**: Lack of communication between the data scientists and business partners causes misunderstanding and disagreement of what the solution is or going to do
- **Project Approach/Scope**: Beginning with a too wide scope of too big a project will fail due to the complexities involved. Instead start with a minimum viable product or a simple model as a start.

# People

People involvement in data science is significant in every step of the process, and requires the development  of many **soft skills**. Specifically, **clear communication** both in verbal and written forms.

# Technology

- **Proper Model**: making incorrect assumptions, misapplying a model or not setting up a proper experiment design can lead to misleading results or failure to solve the problem at hand.
- **Deployment to production**: The data science solution and/or model is not useful until it is deployed to production and put in the hands of users. Deploying a model involves a lot of steps besides training such as availability and monitoring.